<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>VII: Gerda</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-7" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">Gerda</p>
			</hgroup>
			<section id="chapter-7-1" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</h3>
				<p>It rained so hard, so much harder even than usual, that Sunday, that only Barry and Gerda went to walk. Barry walked in every kind of weather, even in the July of 1920.</p>
				<p>Today after lunch Barry said “I’m going to walk over the downs. Anyone coming?” and Gerda got up silently, as was her habit. Kay stretched himself and yawned and said “Me for the fireside. I shall have to walk every day for three weeks after today,” for he was going tomorrow on a reading-party. Rodney and Jim were playing a game of chess that had lasted since breakfast and showed every sign of lasting till bedtime; Neville and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Hilary were talking, and Grandmama was upstairs, having her afternoon nap.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-7-2" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</h3>
				<p>They tramped along, waterproofed and bareheaded, down the sandy road. The rain swished in Gerda’s golden locks, till they clung dank and limp about her cheeks and neck; it beat on Barry’s glasses, so that he took them off and blinked instead. The trees stormed and whistled in the southerly wind that blew from across Merrow Downs. Barry tried to whistle down it, but it caught the sound from his puckered lips and whirled it away.</p>
				<p>Through Merrow they strode, and up onto the road that led across the downs, and there the wind caught them full, and it was as if buckets of water were being flung into their faces. The downs sang and roared; the purple-grey sky shut down on the hill’s shoulder like a tent.</p>
				<p>“Lord, what fun,” said Barry, as they gasped for breath.</p>
				<p>Gerda was upright and slim as a wand against the buffeting; her white little face was stung into shell-pink; her wet hair blew back like yellow seaweed.</p>
				<p>Barry thought suddenly of Nan, who revelled in storms, and quickly shut his mind on the thought. He was schooling himself to think away from Nan, with her wild animal grace and her flashing mind and her cruel, careless indifference.</p>
				<p>Gerda would have walked like this forever. Her wide blue eyes blinked away the rain; her face felt stung and lashed, yet happy and cold; her mouth was stiff and tight. She was part of the storm; as free, as fierce, as singing; though outwardly she was all held together and silent, only smiling a little with her shut mouth.</p>
				<p>As they climbed the downs, the wind blew more wildly in their faces. Gerda swayed against it, and Barry took her by the arm and half pushed her.</p>
				<p>So they reached Newlands Corner, and all southern Surrey stormed below them, and beyond Surrey stormed Sussex, and beyond Sussex the angry, unseen sea.</p>
				<p>They stood looking, and Barry’s arm still steadied Gerda against the gale.</p>
				<p>Gerda thought “It will end. It will be over, and we shall be sitting at tea. Then Sunday will be over, and on Monday he will go back to town.” The pain of that end of the world turned her cold beneath the glow of the storm. Then life settled itself, very simply. She must go too, and work with him. She would tell him so on the way home, when the wind would let them talk.</p>
				<p>They turned their backs on the storm and ran down the hill towards Merrow. Gerda, light as a leaf on the wind, could have run all the way back; Barry, fit and light too, but fifteen years ahead of her, fell after five minutes into a walk.</p>
				<p>Then they could talk a little.</p>
				<p>“And tomorrow I shall be plugging in town,” sighed Barry.</p>
				<p>Gerda always went straight to her point.</p>
				<p>“May I come into your office, please, and learn the work?”</p>
				<p>He smiled down at her. Splendid child!</p>
				<p>“Why, rather. Do you mean it? When do you want to come?”</p>
				<p>“Tomorrow?”</p>
				<p>He laughed. “Good. I thought you meant in the autumn.⁠ ⁠… Tomorrow by all means, if you will. As a matter of fact we’re frightfully short-handed in the office just now. Our typist has crocked, and we haven’t another yet, so people have to type their own letters.”</p>
				<p>“I can do the typing,” said Gerda, composedly. “I can type quite well.”</p>
				<p>“Oh, but that’ll be dull for you. That’s not what you want, is it? Though, if you want to learn about the work, it’s not a bad way⁠ ⁠… you get it all passing through your hands.⁠ ⁠… Would you really take on that job for a bit?”</p>
				<p>Gerda nodded.</p>
				<p>They were rapid and decided people; they did not beat about the bush. If they wanted to do a thing and there seemed no reason why not, they did it.</p>
				<p>“That’s first-class,” said Barry. “Give it a trial, anyhow.⁠ ⁠… Of course you’ll be on trial too; we may find it doesn’t work. If so, there are plenty of other jobs to be done in the office. But that’s what we most want at the moment.”</p>
				<p>Barry had a way of assuming that people would want, naturally, to do the thing that most needed doing.</p>
				<p>Gerda’s soul sang and whistled down the whistling wind. It wasn’t over, then: it was only beginning. The <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">W.E.A.</abbr> was splendid; work was splendid; Barry Briscoe was splendid; life was splendid. She was sorry for Kay at Cambridge, Kay who was just off on a reading party, not helping in the world’s work but merely getting education. Education was inspiring in connection with Democracy, but when applied to oneself it was dull.</p>
				<p>The rain was lessening. It fell on their heads more lightly; the wind was like soft wet kisses on their backs, as they tramped through Merrow, and up the lane to Windover.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-7-3" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</h3>
				<p>They all sat round the tea-table, and most of them were warm and sleepy from Sunday afternoon by the fire, but Barry and Gerda were warm and tingling from walking in the storm. Some people prefer one sensation, some the other.</p>
				<p>Neville thought “How pretty Gerda looks, pink like that.” She was glad to know that she too looked pretty, in her blue afternoon dress. It was good, in that charming room, that they should all look agreeable to the eye. Even <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Hilary, with her nervous, faded grace, marred by self-consciousness and emotion. And Grandmama, smiling and shrewd, with her old indrawn lips; and Rodney, long and lounging and clever; Jim, square-set, sensible, clean-cut, beautiful to his mother and to his women patients, good for everyone to look at; Barry, brown and charming, with his quick smile; the boy Kay, with his pale, rounded, oval face, his violet eyes like his mother’s, only shortsighted, so that he had a trick of screwing them up and peering, and a mouth that widened into a happy sweetness when he smiled.</p>
				<p>They were all right: they all fitted in with the room and with each other.</p>
				<p>Barry said “I’ve not been idle while walking. I’ve secured a secretary. Gerda says she’s coming to work at the office for us for a bit. Now, at once.”</p>
				<p>He had not Gerda’s knack of silence. Gerda would shut up tight over her plans and thoughts, like a little oyster. She was no babbler; she did things and never talked. But Barry’s plans brimmed up and over.</p>
				<p>Neville said “You sudden child! And in July and August, too.⁠ ⁠… But you’ll have only a month before you join Nan in Cornwall, won’t you?”</p>
				<p>Gerda nodded, munching a buttered scone.</p>
				<p>Grandmama, like an old warhorse scenting the fray, thought “Is it going to be an affair? Will they fall in love? And what of Nan?” Then rebuked herself for forgetting what she really knew quite well, having been told it often, that men and girls in these days worked together and did everything together, with no thought of affairs or of falling in love.⁠ ⁠… Only these two were very attractive, the young Briscoe and the pretty child, Gerda.</p>
				<p>Neville, who knew Gerda, and that she was certainly in love again (it happened so often with Gerda), thought “Shall I stop it? Or shall I let things take their course? Oh, I’ll let them alone. It’s only one of Gerda’s childish hero-worships, and he’ll be kind without flirting. It’ll do Gerda good to go on with this new work she’s so keen on. And she knows he cares for Nan. I shall let her go.”</p>
				<p>Neville very nearly always let Gerda and Kay go their own way now that they were grown-up. To interfere would have been the part of the middle-aged old-fashioned mother, and for that part Neville had no liking. To be her children’s friend and good comrade, that was her role in life.</p>
				<p>“It’s good of you to have her,” she said to Barry. “I hope you won’t be sorry.⁠ ⁠… She’s very stupid sometimes⁠—regular Johnny Head-in-air.”</p>
				<p>“I should be a jolly sight more use,” Kay remarked. “But I can’t come, unfortunately. She can’t spell, you know. And her punctuation is weird.”</p>
				<p>“She’ll learn,” said Barry, cheerfully, and Gerda smiled serenely at them over her teacup.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-7-4" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</h3>
				<p>Barry in the office was quick, alert, cheerful, and businesslike, and very decided, sometimes impatient. Efficient: that was the word. He would skim the correspondence and dictate answers out of his head, walking about the room, interrupted all the time by the telephone and by people coming in to see him. Gerda’s hero-worship grew and grew; her soul swelled with it; she shut it down tight and remained calm and cool. When he joked, when he smiled his charming smile, her heart turned over within her. When he had signed the typed letters, she would sometimes put her hand for a moment where his had rested on the paper. He was stern with her sometimes, spoke sharply and impatiently, and that, in a queer way, she liked. She had felt the same pleasure at school, when the head of the school, whom she had greatly and secretly venerated, had had her up to the sixth form room and rowed her. Why? That was for psychoanalysts to discover; Gerda only knew the fact. And Barry, after he had spoken sharply to her, when he had got over his anger, would smile and be even kinder than usual, and that was the best of all.</p>
				<p>There were other people in the office, of course; men and women, busy, efficient, coming in and out, talking, working, organising. They were kind, pleasant people. Gerda liked them, but they were shadowy.</p>
				<p>And behind them all, and behind Barry, there was the work. The work was enormously interesting. Gerda, child of her generation and of her parents, was really a democrat, really public-spirited, outside the little private cell of her withdrawn reserves. Beauty wasn’t enough; making poetry and pictures wasn’t enough; one had to give everyone his and her chance to have beauty and poetry and pictures too. In spite of having been brought up in this creed, Gerda and Kay held to it, had not reacted from it to a selfish aristocracy, as you might think likely. Their democracy went much further than that of their parents. They had been used ardently to call themselves Bolshevists until such time as it was forced upon them that Bolshevism was not, in point of fact, a democratic system. They and some of their friends still occasionally used that label, in moments rather of after-dinner enthusiasm than of the precise thinking that is done in morning light. For, after all, even <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Bertrand Russell, even <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Philip Snowden, might be wrong in their hurried jottings down of the results of a cursory survey of so intricate a system. And, anyhow, Bolshevism had the advantage that it had not yet been tried in this country, and no one, not even the most imaginative and clear-sighted political theorist, could forecast the precise form into which the curious British climate might mould it if it should ever adopt it. So that to believe in it was, anyhow, easier than believing in anything which <em>had</em> been tried (and, like all things which are tried, found wanting) such as Liberalism, Toryism, Socialism, and so forth.</p>
				<p>But the <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">W.E.A.</abbr> was a practical body, which went in for practical adventure. Dowdy, schoolmarmish, extension-lectureish, it might be and doubtless was. But a real thing, with guts in it, really doing something; and after all, you can’t be incendiarising the political and economic constitution all your time. In your times off you can do something useful, something which shows results, and for which such an enormous amount of faith and hope is not required. Work for the Revolution⁠—yes, of course, one did that; one studied the literature of the Internationals; one talked.⁠ ⁠… But did one help the Revolution on much, when all was said? Whereas in the <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">W.E.A.</abbr> office one really got things done; one typed a letter and something happened because of it; more adult classes occurred, more workers got educated. Gerda, too young and too serious to be cynical, believed that this must be right and good.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-7-5" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</h3>
				<p>A clever, strange, charming child Barry found her, old and young beyond her twenty years. Her wide-set blue eyes seemed to see horizons, and too often to be blind to foregrounds. She had a slow, deliberating habit of work, and of some things was astonishingly ignorant, with the ignorance of those who, when at school, have worked at what they preferred and quietly disregarded the rest. If he let her compose a letter, its wording would be quaint. Her prose was, in fact, worse than her verse, and that was saying a good deal. But she was thorough, never slipshod. Her brain ground slowly, but it ground exceeding small; there were no blurred edges to her apprehension of facts; either she didn’t know a thing or she did, and that sharp and clear distinction is none too common. She would file and index papers with precision, and find them again, slow and sure, when they were required. Added to these secretarial gifts, such as they were, she had vision; she saw always the dream through or in spite of the business; she was like Barry himself in that. She was a good companion, too, though she had no wit and not very much humour, and none of Nan’s gifts of keen verbal brilliance, frequent ribaldry and quick response; she would digest an idea slowly, and did not make jokes; her clear mind had the quality of a crystal rather than of a flashing diamond. The rising generation; the woman citizen of tomorrow: what did not rest on her, and what might she not do and be? Nan, on the other hand, was the woman citizen of today. And Nan did not bother to use her vote because she found all the parties and all the candidates about equally absurd. Barry had argued with Nan about that, but made no impression on her cynical indifference; she had met him with levity. To Gerda there was a wrong and a right in politics, instead of only a lot of wrongs; touching young faith, Nan called it, but Barry, who shared it, found it cheering.</p>
				<p>This pretty little white pixyish person, with her yellow hair cut straight across her forehead and waving round her neck like the curled, shining petals of a celandine, with her straight-thinking mind and her queer, secret, mystic thoughts⁠—she was the woman of the future, a citizen and a mother of citizens. She and the other girls and boys were out to build the new heaven and the new earth, and their children would carry it on. This responsibility of Gerda’s invested her with a special interest in the eyes of Barry, who lived and worked for the future, and who, when he saw an infant mewling and puking in a pram, was apt to think “The hope for the world,” and smile at it encouragingly, overlooking its present foolishness of aspect and habit. If ever he had children⁠ ⁠… if Nan would marry him⁠ ⁠… but Nan would always lightly slide away when he got near her.⁠ ⁠… He could see her now, with the cool, amused smile tilting her lips, always sliding away, eluding him.⁠ ⁠… Nan, like a wild animal for grace, brilliant like blown fire, cool like the wind, stabbing herself and him with her keen wit.⁠ ⁠…</p>
				<p>Gerda, looking up from her typewriter to say “How do you spell comparatively?” saw his face in its momentary bitterness as he frowned, pen in hand, out of the window. He was waiting to sign the letters before he went out to a committee meeting, and she thought she was annoying him by her slowness. She spelt comparatively anyhow, and with the wholehearted wrongness to which she and the typewriter, both bad spellers, often attained in conjunction, hastily finished and laid the letters before him. Called back to work and actuality, Barry was again cheerful and kind, and he smilingly corrected comparatively.</p>
				<p>“You might ask me,” he suggested, “instead of experimenting, when I do happen to be at hand. Otherwise a dictionary, or Miss Pinner in the next room⁠ ⁠… ?”</p>
				<p>Gerda was happy, now that the shadow was off his face. Raillery and rebuke she did not mind; only the shadow, which fell coldly on her heart too.</p>
				<p>He left the office then for the day, as he often did, but it was warm and alive with his presence, and she was doing his work, and she would see him again in the morning.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-7-6" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</h3>
				<p>Gerda went home only for weekends now; it was too slow a journey to make every morning and evening. She stayed during the week at a hotel called the Red House, in Magpie Alley, off Bouverie Street. It was a hotel kept by revolutionary souls exclusively for revolutionary souls. Gerda, who had every right there, had gained admittance through friends of hers who lodged there. Every evening at six o’clock she went back through the rain, as she did this evening, and changed her wet clothes and sat down to dinner, a meal which all the revolutionary souls ate together so that it was sacramental, a breaking of common bread in token of a common faith.</p>
				<p>They were a friendly party. At one end of the table Aunt Phyllis presided. Aunt Phyllis, who was really the aunt of only one young man, kept this Red House. She was a fiery little revolutionary in the late forties, small, and thin and darting, full of faith and fire. She was on the staff of the British Bolshevist, and for the rest, wrote leaflets, which showered from her as from trees in autumn gales. So did the <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Rev.</abbr> Anselm Digby. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Digby had also the platform habit, he would go round the country denouncing and inciting to revolution in the name of Christ and of the Third International. Though grizzled, he belonged to the League of Youth, as well as to many other eager fraternities. He was unbeneficed, having no time for parish work. This ardent clergyman sat at the other end of Aunt Phyllis’s table, as befitted his years.</p>
				<p>The space between the two ends was filled by younger creatures. It was spring with them; their leaflets were yet green and unfallen; all that fell from them was poetry, pathetic in its sadness, bitter in its irony, free of metrical or indeed of any other restraints, and mainly either about how unpleasant had been the trenches in which they had spent the years of the great war and those persons over military age who had not been called upon to enter them, or about freedom; free love, free thought and a free world. Yes, both these subjects sound a little old-fashioned, but the Red House was concerned with these elemental changeless things. And some of them also wrote fiction, quiet, grey, a little tired, about unhappy persons to whom nothing was very glad or very sad, and certainly neither right nor wrong, but only rough or smooth of surface, bright or dark of hue, sweet or bitter of taste or smell. Most of those in the room belonged to a Freudian circle at their club, and all were anti-Christian, except an Irish Roman Catholic, who had taken an active part in the Easter uprising of 1916, since when he had been living in exile; Aunt Phyllis, who believed in no churches but in the Love of God; and of course, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Digby. All these people, though they did not always get on very well together, were linked by a common aim in life, and by common hatreds.</p>
				<p>But, in spite of hate, the Red House lodgers were a happy set of revolutionaries. Real revolutionaries; having their leaflets printed by secret presses; members of societies which exchanged confidential letters with the more eminent Russians, such as Litvinoff and Trotzky, collected for future publication secret circulars, private strikebreaking orders, and other obiter dicta of a rash government, and believed themselves to be working to establish the Soviet government over Europe. They had been angry all this summer because the Glasgow conference of the <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">I.L.P.</abbr> had broken with the Third International. They spoke with acerbity of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Ramsay Macdonald and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Philip Snowden. But now, in August, they had little acerbity to spare for anything but the government’s conduct of Irish affairs.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-7-7" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</h3>
				<p>But, though these were Gerda’s own people, the circle in which she felt at home, she looked forward every night to the morning, when there would be the office again, and Barry.</p>
				<p>Sometimes Barry took her out to dinner and a theatre. They went to the <i epub:type="se:name.music.opera">Beggar’s Opera</i>, <i epub:type="se:name.music.opera">The Grain of Mustard Seed</i>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Mary Rose</i> (which they found sentimental), and to the <i epub:type="se:name.music.opera">Beggar’s Opera</i> again Gerda had her own ideas, very definite and critical, about dramatic merit. Barry enjoyed discussing the plays with her, listening to her clear little silver voice pronouncing judgment. Gerda might be forever mediocre in any form of artistic expression, but she was an artist, with the artist’s love of merit and scorn of the second-rate.</p>
				<p>They went to <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Mary Rose</i> with some girl cousins of Barry’s, two jolly girls from Girton. Against their undiscriminating enthusiasm, Gerda and her fastidious distaste stood out sharp and clear, like some delicate etching among flamboyant pictures. That fastidiousness she had from both her parents, with something of her own added.</p>
				<p>Barry went home with her. He wondered how her fastidiousness stood the grimy house in Magpie Alley and its ramshackle habit of life, after the distinctions and beauty of Windover, but he thought it was probably very good for her, part of the experience which should mould the citizen. Gerda shrank from no experience. At the corner of Bouverie Street they met a painted girl out for hire, strayed for some reason into this unpropitious locality. For the moment Gerda had fallen behind and Barry seemed alone. The girl stopped in his path, looked up in his face enquiringly, and he pushed his way, not urgently, past her. The next moment Gerda’s hand caught his arm.</p>
				<p>“Stop, Barry, stop.”</p>
				<p>“Stop? What for?”</p>
				<p>“The woman. Didn’t you see?”</p>
				<p>“My dear child, I can’t do anything for her.”</p>
				<p>Like the others of her generation, Gerda was interested in persons of that profession; he knew that already; only they saw them through a distorting mist.</p>
				<p>“We can find out where she works, what wages she gets, why she’s on the streets. She’s probably working for sweated wages somewhere. We <em>ought</em> to find out.”</p>
				<p>“We can’t find out about every woman of that kind we meet. The thing is to attack the general principle behind the thing, not each individual case.⁠ ⁠… Besides, it would be so frightfully impertinent of us. How would you like it if someone stopped you in the street and asked you where you worked and whether you were sweated or not, and why you were out so late?”</p>
				<p>“I shouldn’t mind, if they wanted to know for a good reason. One <em>ought</em> to find out how things are, what people’s conditions are.”</p>
				<p>It was what Barry too believed and practised, but he could only say “It’s the wrong way round. You’ve got to work from the centre to the circumference.⁠ ⁠… And don’t fall into the sentimental mistake of thinking that all prostitution comes from sweated labour. A great deal does, of course, but a great deal because it seems to some women an easy and attractive way of earning a living.⁠ ⁠… Oh, hammer away at sweated labour for all you’re worth, of course, for that reason and every other; but you won’t stop prostitution till you stop the demand for it. That’s the poisonous root of the thing. So long as the demand goes on, you’ll get the supply, whatever economic conditions may be.”</p>
				<p>Gerda fell silent, pondering on the strange tastes of those who desired for some reason the temporary company of these unfortunate females, so unpleasing to the eye, to the ear, to the mind, to the smell; desired it so much that they would pay money for it. <em>Why?</em> Against that riddle the non-comprehension of her sex beat itself, baffled. She might put it the other way round, try to imagine herself desiring, paying for, the temporary attentions of some dirty, common, vapid, and patchouli-scented man⁠—and still she got no nearer. For she never could desire it.⁠ ⁠… Well, anyhow, there the thing was. Stop the demand? Stop that desire of men for women? Stop the ready response of women to it? If that was the only way, then there was indeed nothing for it but education⁠—and was even education any use for that?</p>
				<p>“Is it love,” she asked of Barry, “that the men feel who want these women?”</p>
				<p>Barry laughed shortly. “Love? Good Lord, no.”</p>
				<p>“What then, Barry?”</p>
				<p>“I don’t know that it can be explained, exactly.⁠ ⁠… It’s a passing taste, I suppose, a desire for the company of another sex from one’s own, just because it <em>is</em> another sex, though it may have no other attractions.⁠ ⁠… It’s no use trying to analyse it, one doesn’t get anywhere. But it’s not love.”</p>
				<p>“What’s love, then? What’s the difference?”</p>
				<p>“Have I to define love, walking down Magpie Alley? You could do it as well as I could. Love has the imagination in it, and the mind. I suppose that’s the difference. And, too, love wants to give. This is all platitude. No one can ever say anything new about love, it’s all been said. Got your latchkey?”</p>
				<p>Gerda let herself into the Red House and went up to bed and lay wakeful. Very certainly she loved Barry, with all her imagination and all her mind, and she would have given him more than all that was hers. Very surely and truly she loved him, even if after all he was to be her uncle by marriage, which would make their family life like that in one of Louis Couperus’s books. But why unhappy like that? Was love unhappy? If she might see him sometimes, talk to him, if Nan wouldn’t want all of him all the time⁠—and it would be unlike Nan to do that⁠—she could be happy. One could share, after all. Women must share, for there were a million more women in England than men.</p>
				<p>But probably Nan didn’t mean to marry him at all. Nan never married people.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-7-8" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</h3>
				<p>Next morning at the office Barry said he had heard from Nan. She had asked him to come too and bicycle in Cornwall, with her and Gerda and Kay.</p>
				<p>“You will, won’t you,” said Gerda.</p>
				<p>“Rather, of course.”</p>
				<p>A vaguely puzzled note sounded in his voice. But he would come.</p>
				<p>Cornwall was illuminated to Gerda. The sharing process would begin there. But for a week more she had him to herself, and that was better.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
