<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-12" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XII</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">The Mother</p>
			</hgroup>
			<section id="chapter-12-1" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</h3>
				<p>The happiness <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Hilary now enjoyed was of the religious type⁠—a deep, warm glow, which did not lack excitement. She felt as those may be presumed to feel who have just been converted to some church⁠—newly alive, and sunk in spiritual peace, and in profound harmony with life. Where were the old rubs, frets, jars and ennuis? Vanished, melted like yesterday’s snows in the sun of this new peace. It was as if she had cast her burden upon the Lord. That, said her psychoanalyst doctor, was quite in order; that was what it ought to be like. That was, in effect, what she had in point of fact done; only the place of the Lord was filled by himself. To put the matter briefly, transference of burden had been effected; <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Hilary had laid all her cares, all her perplexities, all her grief, upon this quiet, acute-looking man, who sat with her twice a week for an hour, drawing her out, arranging her symptoms for her, penetrating the hidden places of her soul, looking like a cross between Sherlock Holmes and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Henry Ainley. Her confidence in him was, he told her, the expression of the father-image, which surprised <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Hilary a little, because he was twenty years her junior.</p>
				<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Hilary felt that she was getting to know herself very well indeed. Seeing herself through <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cradock’s mind, she felt that she was indeed a curious jumble of complexes, of strange, mysterious impulses, desires and fears. Alarming, even horrible in some ways; so that often she thought “Can he be right about me? Am I really like that? Do I really hope that Marjorie (Jim’s wife) will die, so that Jim and I may be all in all to each other again? Am I really so wicked?” But <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cradock said that it was not at all wicked, perfectly natural and normal⁠—the Unconscious <em>was</em> like that. And worse than that; how much worse he had to break to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Hilary, who was refined and easily shocked, by gentle hints and slow degrees, lest she should be shocked to death. Her dreams, which she had to recount to him at every sitting, bore such terrible significance⁠—they grew worse and worse in proportion, as <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Hilary could stand more.</p>
				<p>“Ah well,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Hilary sighed uneasily, after an interpretation into strange terms of a dream she had about bathing, “it’s very odd, when I’ve never even thought about things like that.”</p>
				<p>“Your Unconscious,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cradock, firmly, “has thought the more. The more your Unconscious is obsessed by a thing, the less your conscious self thinks of it. It is shy of the subject, for that very reason.”</p>
				<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Hilary was certainly shy of the subject, for that reason or others. When she felt too shy of it, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cradock let her change it. “It may be true,” she would say, “but it’s very terrible, and I would rather not dwell on it.”</p>
				<p>So he would let her dwell instead on the early days of her married life, or on the children’s childhood, or on her love for Neville and Jim, or on her impatience with her mother.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-12-2" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</h3>
				<p>They were happy little times, stimulating, cosy little times. They spoke straight to the heart, easing it of its weight of tragedy. A splendid man, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cradock, with his shrewd, penetrating sympathy, his kind firmness. He would listen with interest to everything; the sharp words she had had with Grandmama, troubles with the maids, the little rubs of daily life (and what a rubbing business life is, to be sure!) as well as to profounder, more tragic accounts of desolation, jealousy, weariness and despair. He would say “Your case is a very usual one,” so that she did not feel ashamed of being like that. He reduced it all, dispassionately and yet not unsympathetically, and with clear scientific precision, to terms of psychical and physical laws. He trained his patient to use her mind and her will, as well as to remember her dreams and to be shocked at nothing that they signified.</p>
				<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Hilary would wake each morning, or during the night, and clutch at the dream which was flying from her, clutch and secure it, and make it stand and deliver its outlines to her. She was content with outlines; it was for <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cradock to supply the interpretation. Sometimes, if <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Hilary couldn’t remember any dreams, he would supply, according to a classic precedent, the dream as well as the interpretation. But on the whole, deeply as she revered and admired him, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Hilary preferred to remember her own dreams; what they meant was bad enough, but the meaning of the dreams that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cradock told her she had dreamt was beyond all words.⁠ ⁠… That terrible Unconscious! <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Hilary disliked it excessively; she felt rather as if it were a sewer, sunk beneath an inadequate grating.</p>
				<p>But from <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cradock she put up with hearing about it. She would have put up with anything. He was so steadying and so wonderful. He enabled her to face life with a new poise, a fresh lease of strength and vitality. She told Grandmama so. Grandmama said “Yes, my dear, I’ve observed it in you. It sounds to me an unpleasing business, but it is obviously doing you good, so far. I only wish it may last. The danger may be reaction, after you have finished the course and lost touch with this young man.” (<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cradock was forty-five, but Grandmama, it must be remembered, was eighty-four.) “You will have to guard against that. In a way it was a pity you didn’t take up churchgoing instead; religion lasts.”</p>
				<p>“And these quackeries do not,” Grandmama finished her sentence to herself, not wishing to be discouraging.</p>
				<p>“Not always,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Hilary truly replied, meaning that religion did not always last.</p>
				<p>“No,” Grandmama agreed. “Unfortunately not always. Particularly when it is High Church. There was your uncle Bruce, of course.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
				<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Hilary’s uncle Bruce, who had been High Church for a season, and had even taken Orders in the year 1860, but whose faith had wilted in the heat and toil of the day, so that by 1870 he was an agnostic barrister, took Grandmama back through the last century, and she became reminiscent over the Tractarian movement, and, later, the Ritualists.</p>
				<p>“The Queen never could abide them,” said Grandmama. “Nor could Lord Beaconsfield, nor your father, though he was always kind and tolerant. I remember when <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Jowett came to stay with us, how they talked about it.⁠ ⁠… Ah well, they’ve become very prominent since then, and done a great deal of good work, and there are many very able, excellent men and women among them.⁠ ⁠… But they’re not High Church any longer, they tell me. They’re Catholics in these days. I don’t know enough of them to judge them, but I don’t think they can have the dignity of the old High Church party, for if they had I can’t imagine that Gilbert’s wife, for instance, would have joined them, even for so short a time as she did.⁠ ⁠… Well, it suits some people, and psychoanalysis obviously suits others. Only I do hope you will try to keep moderate and balanced, my child, and not believe all this young man tells you. Parts of it do sound so very strange.”</p>
				<p>(But <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Hilary would not have dreamt of repeating to Grandmama the strangest parts of all.)</p>
				<p>“I feel a new woman,” she said, fervently, and Grandmama smiled, well pleased, thinking that it certainly did seem rather like the old evangelical conversions of her youth. (Which, of course, did not always last, any more than the High Church equivalents did.)</p>
				<p>All Grandmama committed herself to, in her elderly caution, which came however less from age than from having known <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Hilary for sixty-three years, was “Well, well, we must see.”</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-12-3" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</h3>
				<p>And then Rosalind’s letter came. It came by the afternoon post⁠—the big, mauve, scented, sprawled sheets, dashingly monographed across one corner.</p>
				<p>“Gilbert’s wife,” pronounced Grandmama, non-committally from her easy chair, and, said in that tone, it was quite sufficient comment. “Another cup of tea, please, Emily.”</p>
				<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Hilary gave it to her, then began to read aloud the letter from Gilbert’s wife. Gilbert’s wife was one of the topics upon which she and Grandmama were in perfect accord, only that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Hilary was irritated when Grandmama pushed the responsibility for the relationship onto her by calling Rosalind “your daughter-in-law.”</p>
				<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Hilary began to read the letter in the tone used by well-bred women when they would, if in a slightly lower social stratum, say “Fancy that now! Did you ever, the brazen hussy!” Grandmama listened, cynically disapproving, prepared to be disgusted yet entertained. On the whole she thoroughly enjoyed letters from Gilbert’s wife. She settled down comfortably in her chair with her second cup of tea, while <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Hilary read two pages of what Grandmama called “foolish chitchat.” Rosalind’s letters were really like the gossipping imbecilities written by Eve of the Tatler, or the other ladies who enliven our shinier-paper weeklies with their bright personal babble. She did not often waste one of them on her mother-in-law; only when she had something to say which might annoy her.</p>
				<p>“Do you hear from Nan?” the third page of the letter began. “I hear from the Bramertons, who are wintering in Rome⁠—the Charlie Bramertons, you know, great friends of mine and Gilbert’s (he won a pot of money on the Derby this year and they’ve a dinky flat in some palace out there⁠—), and they meet Nan about, and she’s always with Stephen Lumley, the painter (rotten painter, if you ask me, but he’s somehow diddled London into admiring him, don’t expect you’ve heard of him down at the seaside). Well, they’re quite simply <em>always</em> together, and the Brams say that everyone out there says it isn’t in the least an ambiguous case⁠—no two ways about it. He doesn’t live with his wife, you know. You’ll excuse me passing this on to you, but it does seem you ought to know. I mentioned it to Neville the other day, just before the poor old dear went down with the plague, but you know what Neville is, she always sticks up for Nan and doesn’t care <em>what</em> she does, or what people say. People are talking; beasts, aren’t they! But that’s the way of this wicked old world, we all do it. Gilbert’s quite upset about it, says Nan ought to manage her affairs more quietly. But after all and between you and me it’s not the first time Nan’s been a Town Topic, is it.</p>
				<p>“How’s the psycho going? Isn’t Cradock rather a priceless pearl? You’re over head and ears with him by now, of course, we all are. Psycho wouldn’t do you any good if you weren’t, that’s the truth. Cradock told me himself once that transference can’t be effected without the patient being a little bit smitten. Personally I should give up a man patient at once if he didn’t rather like me. But isn’t it soothing and comforting, and doesn’t it make you feel good all over, like a hot bath when you’re fagged out.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
				<p>But <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Hilary didn’t get as far as this. She stopped at “not the first time Nan’s been a Town Topic.⁠ ⁠…” and dropped the thin mauve sheets onto her lap, and looked at Grandmama, her face queerly tight and flushed, as if she were about to cry.</p>
				<p>Grandmama had finished her tea, and had been listening quietly.</p>
				<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Hilary said “Oh, my God,” and jerked her head back, quivering like a nervous horse who has had a shock and does not care to conceal it.</p>
				<p>“Your daughter-in-law,” said Grandmama, without excitement, “is an exceedingly vulgar young woman.”</p>
				<p>“Vulgar? Rosalind? But of course.⁠ ⁠… Only that doesn’t affect Nan.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
				<p>“Your daughter-in-law,” Grandmama added, “is also a very notorious liar.”</p>
				<p>“A liar⁠ ⁠… oh yes, yes, yes.⁠ ⁠… But this time it’s true. Oh I feel, I know, it’s true. Nan <em>would</em>. That Stephen Lumley⁠—he’s been hanging about her for ages.⁠ ⁠… Oh yes, it’s true what they say. The very worst.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
				<p>Grandmama glanced at her curiously. The very worst in that direction had become strangely easier of credence by <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Hilary lately. Grandmama had observed that. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cradock’s teaching had not been without its effect. According to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cradock, people were usually engaged either in practising the very worst, or in desiring to practise it, or in wishing and dreaming that they had practised it. It was the nature of mankind, and not in the least reprehensible, though curable. Thus <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cradock. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Hilary had, against her own taste, absorbed part of his teaching, but nothing could ever persuade her that it was not reprehensible: it quite obviously was. Also disgusting. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cradock might say what he liked. It <em>was</em> disgusting. And when the man had a wife.⁠ ⁠…</p>
				<p>“It is awful,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Hilary. “Awful.⁠ ⁠… It must be stopped. I shall go to Rome. At once.”</p>
				<p>“That won’t stop it, dear, if it is going on. It will only irritate the young people.”</p>
				<p>“Irritate! You can use a word like that! Mother, you don’t realise this ghastly thing.”</p>
				<p>“I quite see, my dear, that Nan may be carrying on with this artist. And very wrong it is, if so. All I say is that your going to Rome won’t stop it. You know that you and Nan don’t always get on very smoothly. You rub each other up.⁠ ⁠… It would be far better if someone else went. Neville, say.”</p>
				<p>“Neville is ill.” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Hilary shut her lips tightly on that. She was glad Neville was ill; she had always hated (she could not help it) the devotion between Neville and Nan. Nan, in her tempestuous childhood, flaring with rage against her mother, or sullen, spiteful and perverse, long before she could have put into words the qualities in <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Hilary which made her like that, had always gone to Neville, nine years older, to be soothed and restored to good temper. Neville had reprimanded the little naughty sister, had told her she must be “decent to mother⁠—feel decent if you can, behave decent in any case,” was the way she had put it. It was Neville who had heard Nan’s confidences and helped her out of scrapes in childhood, schoolgirlhood and ever since. This was very bitter to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Hilary. She was jealous of both of them; jealous that so much of Neville’s love should go elsewhere than to her, jealous that Nan, who gave her nothing except generous and extravagant gifts and occasional, spasmodic, remorseful efforts at affection and gentleness, should to Neville give all.</p>
				<p>“Neville is ill,” she said. “She certainly won’t be fit to travel out of England this winter. Influenza coming on the top of that miserable breakdown is a thing to be treated with the greatest care. Even when she is recovered, post-influenza will keep her weak till the summer. I am really anxious about her. No; Neville is quite out of the question.”</p>
				<p>“Well, what about Pamela?”</p>
				<p>“Pamela is up to her eyes in her work.⁠ ⁠… Besides, why should Pamela go, or Neville, rather than I? A girl’s mother is obviously the right person. I may not be of much use to my children in these days, but at least I hope I can save them from themselves.”</p>
				<p>“It takes a clever parent to do that, Emily,” said Grandmama, who doubtless knew.</p>
				<p>“But, mother, what would you <em>have</em> me do? Sit with my hands before me while my daughter lives in sin? What’s <em>your</em> plan?”</p>
				<p>“I’m too old to make plans, dear. I can only look on at the world. I’ve looked at the world now for many, many years, and I’ve learnt that only great wisdom and great love can change people’s decisions as to their way of life, or turn them from evil courses. Frankly, my child, I doubt if you have, where Nan is concerned, enough wisdom or enough love. Enough sympathy, I should rather say, for you have love. But do you feel you understand the child enough to interfere wisely and successfully?”</p>
				<p>“Oh, you think I’m a fool, mother; of course I know you’ve always thought me a fool. Good God, if a mother can’t interfere with her own daughter to save her from wickedness and disaster, who can, I should like to know?”</p>
				<p>“One would indeed like to know that,” Grandmama said, sadly.</p>
				<p>“Perhaps you’d like to go yourself,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Hilary shot at her, quivering now with anger and feeling.</p>
				<p>“No, my dear. Even if I were able to get to Rome I should know that I was too old to interfere with the lives of the young. I don’t understand them enough. You believe that you do. Well, I suppose you must go and try. I can’t stop you.”</p>
				<p>“You certainly can’t. Nothing can stop me.⁠ ⁠… You’re singularly unsympathetic, mother, about this awful business.”</p>
				<p>“I don’t feel so, dear. I am very, very sorry for you, and very, very sorry for Nan (whom, you must remember, we may be slandering). I have always looked on unlawful love as a very great sin, though there may be great provocation to it.”</p>
				<p>“It is an awful sin.” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cradock could say what he liked on that subject; he might tell <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Hilary that it was not awful except in so far as any other yielding to nature’s promptings in defiance of the law of man was awful, but he could not persuade her. Like many other people, she set that particular sin apart, in a special place by itself; she would talk of “a bad woman,” “an immoral man,” a girl who had “lost her character,” and mean merely the one kind of badness, the one manifestation of immorality, the one element in character. Dishonesty and cruelty she could forgive, but never that.</p>
				<p>“I shall start in three days,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Hilary, becoming tragically resolute. “I must tell <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cradock tomorrow.”</p>
				<p>“That young man? Must he know about Nan’s affairs, my dear?”</p>
				<p>“I have to tell him everything, mother. It’s part of the course. He is as secret as the grave.”</p>
				<p>Grandmama knew that Emily, less secret than the grave, would have to ease herself of the sad tale to someone or other in the course of the next day, and supposed that it had better be to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cradock, who seemed to be a kind of hybrid of doctor and clergyman, and so presumably was more discreet than an ordinary human being. Emily must tell. Emily always would. That was why she enjoyed this foolish psychoanalysis business so much.</p>
				<p>At the very thought of it a gleam had brightened <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Hilary’s eyes, and her rigid, tense pose had relaxed. Oh the comfort of telling <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cradock! Even if he did tell her how it was all in the course of nature, at least he would sympathise with her trouble about it, and her annoyance with Grandmama. And he would tell her how best to deal with Nan when she got to her. Nan’s was the sort of case that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cradock really did understand. Any situation between the sexes⁠—he was all over it. Psychoanalysts adored sex; they made an idol of it. They communed with it, as devotees with their God. They couldn’t really enjoy, with their whole minds, anything else, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Hilary sometimes vaguely felt. But as, like the gods of the other devotees, it was to them immanent, everywhere and in everything; they could be always happy. If they went up into heaven it was there; if they fled down into hell it was there also. Once, when <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Hilary had tentatively suggested that Freud, for instance, overstated its importance, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cradock had said firmly “It is impossible to do that,” which settled it once and for all.</p>
				<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Hilary stood up. Her exalted, tragic mood clothed her like a flowing garment.</p>
				<p>“I shall write to Cook,” she said. “Also to Nan, to tell her I am coming.”</p>
				<p>Grandmama, after a moment’s silence, seemed to gather herself together for a final effort.</p>
				<p>“Emily, my child. Is your mind set to do this?”</p>
				<p>“Absolutely, mother. Absolutely and entirely.”</p>
				<p>“Shall I tell you what I think? No, you don’t want to hear it, but you drive me to it.⁠ ⁠… If you go to that foolish, reckless child and attempt to interfere with her, or even to question her, you will run the risk, if she is innocent, of driving her into what you are trying to prevent. If she is already committed to it, you run the risk of shutting the door against her return. In either case you will alienate her from yourself: that is the least of the risks you run, though the most certain.⁠ ⁠… That is all. I can say no more. But I ask you, my dear.⁠ ⁠… I beg you, for the child’s sake and your own⁠ ⁠… to write neither to Cook nor to Nan.”</p>
				<p>Grandmama’s breath came rather fast and heavily; her heart was troubling her; emotion and effort were not good for it.</p>
				<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Hilary stood looking down at the old shrunk figure, shaking a little as she stood, knowing that she must be patient and calm.</p>
				<p>“You will please allow me to judge. You will please let me take the steps I think necessary to help my child. I know that you have no confidence in my judgment or my tact; you’ve always shown that plainly enough, and done your best to teach my children the same view of me.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
				<p>Grandmama put up her hand, meaning that she could not stand, neither she nor her heart could stand, a scene. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Hilary broke off. For once she did not want a scene either. In these days she found what vent was necessary for her emotional system in her interviews with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cradock.</p>
				<p>“I daresay you mean well, mother. But in this matter I must be the judge. I am a mother first and foremost. It is the only thing that life has left for me to be.” (Scarcely a daughter, she meant: that was made too difficult for her; you would almost imagine that the office was not wanted.)</p>
				<p>She turned to the writing table.</p>
				<p>“First of all I shall write to Rosalind, and tell her what I think of her and her abominable gossip.”</p>
				<p>She began to write.</p>
				<p>Grandmama sat shrunk and old and tired in her chair.</p>
				<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Hilary’s pen scratched over the paper, telling Rosalind what she thought.</p>
				<p>“Dear Rosalind,” she wrote, “I was very much surprised at your letter. I do not know why you should trouble to repeat to me these ridiculous stories about Nan. You cannot suppose that I am likely to care either what you or any of your friends are saying about one of my children.⁠ ⁠…” And so on. One knows the style. It eases the mind of the writer and does not deceive the reader. When the reader is Rosalind Hilary it amuses her vastly.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-12-4" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</h3>
				<p>Next day, at three <abbr>p.m.</abbr>, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Hilary told <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cradock all about it. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cradock was not in the least surprised. Nor had he the slightest, not the remotest doubt that Nan and Stephen Lumley were doing what <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Hilary called living in sin, what he preferred to call obeying the natural ego. (After all, as any theologian would point out, the terms are synonymous in a fallen world.)</p>
				<p>“I must have your advice,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Hilary said. “You must tell me what line to take with her.”</p>
				<p>“Shall you,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cradock enquired, thoughtful and intelligent, “find your daughter in a state of conflict?”</p>
				<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Hilary spread her hands helplessly before her.</p>
				<p>“I know nothing; nothing.”</p>
				<p>“A very great deal,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cradock, “depends on that. If she is torn between the cravings of the primitive ego and the inhibitions put upon these cravings by the conventions of society⁠—if, in fact, her censor, her endopsychic censor, is still functioning.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
				<p>“Oh, I doubt if Nan’s got an endopsychic censor. She is so lawless always.”</p>
				<p>“Every psyche has a censor.” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cradock was firm. “Regarded, of course, by the psyche with very varying degrees of respect. Well, what I mean to say is, if your daughter is in a state of conflict, with forces pulling her both ways, her case will be very much easier to deal with than if she has let her primitive ego so take possession of the situation that she feels in a state of harmony. In the former case, you will only have to strengthen the forces which are opposing her sexual craving.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
				<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Hilary fidgeted uneasily. “Oh, I don’t think Nan feels <em>that</em> exactly. None of my children.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
				<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cradock gave her an amused glance. It seemed sometimes that he would never get this foolish lady properly educated.</p>
				<p>“Your children, I presume, are human, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Hilary. Sexual craving means a craving for intimacy with a member of another sex.”</p>
				<p>“Oh well, I suppose it does. I don’t care for the <em>name</em>, somehow. But please go on.”</p>
				<p>“I was going to say, if you find, on the other hand, that your daughter’s nature has attained harmony in connection with this course she is pursuing, your task will be far more difficult. You will then have to <em>create</em> a discord, instead of merely strengthening it.⁠ ⁠… May I ask your daughter’s age?”</p>
				<p>“Nan is thirty-three.”</p>
				<p>“A dangerous age.”</p>
				<p>“All Nan’s ages,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Hilary, “have been dangerous. Nan is like that.”</p>
				<p>“As to that,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cradock, “we may say that all ages are dangerous to all people, in this dangerous life we live. But the thirties are a specially dangerous time for women. They have outlived the shynesses and restraints of girlhood, and not attained to the caution and discretion of middle age. They are reckless, and consciously or unconsciously on the lookout for adventure. They see ahead of them the end of youth, and that quickens their pace.⁠ ⁠… Has passion always been a strong element in your daughter’s life?”</p>
				<p>“Oh, passion.⁠ ⁠…” (Another word not liked by <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Hilary.) “Not quite that, I should say. Nan has been reckless; she has got into scrapes, got herself talked about. She has played about with men a good deal always. But as to passion.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
				<p>“A common thing enough,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cradock told her, as it were reassuringly. “Nothing to fight shy of, or be afraid of. But something to be regulated of course.⁠ ⁠… Now, the thing is to oppose to this irregular desire of your daughter’s for this man a new and a stronger set of desires. Fight one group of complexes with another. You can’t, I suppose, persuade her to be analysed? There are good analysts in Rome.”</p>
				<p>“Oh no. Nan laughs at it. She laughs at everything of that sort.”</p>
				<p>“A great mistake. A mistake often made by shallow and foolish people. They might as well laugh at surgery.⁠ ⁠… Well now, to go into this question of the battle between the complex-groups.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
				<p>He went into it, patiently and exhaustively. His phrases drifted over <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Hilary’s head.</p>
				<p>“… a deterrent force residing in the ego and preventing us from stepping outside the bounds of propriety.⁠ ⁠… Rebellious messages sent up from the Unconscious, which wishes to live, love and act in archaic modes⁠ ⁠… conflict with the progress of human society⁠ ⁠… inhibitory and repressive power of the censor.⁠ ⁠…” (How wonderful, thought <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Hilary, to be able to talk so like a book for so long together!)⁠ ⁠… “give the censor all the help we can⁠ ⁠… keep the Unconscious in order by turning its energies into some other channel⁠ ⁠… give it a substitute.⁠ ⁠… The energy involved in the intense desire for someone of another sex can be diverted⁠ ⁠… employed on some useful work. Libido⁠ ⁠… it should all be used. Find another channel for your daughter’s libido.⁠ ⁠… Her life is perhaps a rather vacant one?”</p>
				<p>That <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Hilary was able to reply to.</p>
				<p>“Nan’s? Vacant? Oh no. She is quite full of energy. Too full. Always doing a thousand things. And she writes, you know.”</p>
				<p>“Ah. That should be an outlet. A great deal of libido is used up by that. Well, her present strong desire for this man should be sublimated into a desire for something else. I gather that her root trouble is lawlessness. That can be cured. You must make her remember her first lawless action.” (Man’s first disobedience and the fruit thereof, thought <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Hilary.)</p>
				<p>“O dear me,” she said, “I’m afraid that would be impossible. When she was a month old she used to attempt to dash her bottle onto the floor.”</p>
				<p>“People have even remembered their baptisms, when driven back to them by analysis.”</p>
				<p>“Our children were not baptised. My husband was something of a Unitarian. He said he would not tie them up with a rite against which they might react in later life. So they were merely registered.”</p>
				<p>“Ah. In a way that is a pity. Baptism is an impressive moment in the sensitive consciousness of the infant. It has sometimes been found to be a sort of lamp shining through the haze of the early memory. Registration, owing to the nonparticipation of the infant, is useless in that way.”</p>
				<p>“Nan might remember how she kicked me when I short-coated her,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Hilary mused, hopefully.</p>
				<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cradock flowed on. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Hilary, listened, assented, was impressed. It all sounded so simple, so wonderful, even so beautiful. But she thought once or twice, “He doesn’t know Nan.”</p>
				<p>“Thank you,” she said, rising to go when her hour was over. “You have made me feel so much stronger, as usual. I can’t thank you enough for all you do for me. I could face none of my troubles and problems but for your help.”</p>
				<p>“That merely means,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cradock, who always got the last word, “that your ego is at present in what is called the state of infantile dependence or tutelage. A necessary but an impermanent stage in its struggle towards the adult level of the reality-principle.”</p>
				<p>“I suppose so,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Hilary said. “Goodbye.”</p>
				<p>“He is too clever for me,” she thought, as she went home. “He is often above my head.” But she was used to that in the people she met.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
